give me 10 minutes to show you how EQ
Works what it does and how to use it and
know this is not some comprehensive
learn everything that you need to know
about EQ kind of a click bity video the
goal here is to give you a fast and
basic understanding of EQ that you can
run with so let's just do it EQ is short
for equalizer and what eqs specifically
do are alter the volume of specific
frequencies that's it so a simple EQ
plugin would look like this channel EQ
which is right here this is the stock EQ
and logic which sounds quite nice or we
can actually use vintage style eqs which
are going to look a little bit more like
this instead with the knobs instead of
more of the visualizer that we can see
with the channel EQ strip they
ultimately do the same thing but the
visual aesthetic is going to be the main
difference and yes they're going to
sound a little bit different from each
other but they do the exact same thing
now for this video I'm going to be using
the channel EQ since it's a bit easier
to visualize so eqs have three primary
controls that every EQ is going to have
first is the frequency which is going to
control
what specific frequency range we want to
alter you can see we go from 20 all the
way down here on the left all the way up
to 20K on the right this is actual
frequencies now the frequencies are
measured in hertz which are directly
related to pitch so 440 which would be
right around here you can see 440 down
there 448 that is an A so if I were to
sing an a that would be 440 Hertz but in
the EQ sense this is what specific tonal
characteristic of that sound that we are
going to be shaping now the second
control is volume we can manipulate
frequencies by adding or subtracting
volume from that specific frequency so
if I wanted to remove some of this 448
Herz right here I could subtract that or
I could boost it and as you can see here
on this little dial right here that is
showing the amount that we're actually
doing it and that is going to be
measured in decb or DBS and the third is
the shape there are three types of
shapes that we can use there is a filter
which is going to be something like this
right here on the top end or something
like this right here on the bottom end
so this right here on the bottom is
what's called a high pass filter which
would cut everything below the amount
that we set it to so this shaded region
right here that red shaded region is
going to be completely eliminated so as
you can see here I have this set to 98
Hertz so everything below 98 htz at this
type of slope is going to be eliminated
from that sound now a shelf is going to
look like this it's going to be boosted
shelf that right there is a reduced
shelf and as you can see by by the shape
it's going to boost or subtract in a
shelf-like shape so it's not going to
entirely add or remove but it comes to a
plateau and the third type is a bell
shape which is mostly used in the middle
frequency spectrums right here and you
can see right here as I boost this that
looks like a bell now we can control the
actual width of the Bell the specific
shape of that Bell with this little
bottom number right here which is called
Q control or Q factor as we bump that up
as you can see that is getting more and
more narrow and as we we make that
smaller that number is going to add more
width to the actual frequency so
something like this right here is going
to boost starting at 448 in the middle
but as you can see here it's actually
boosting all the way down into like 40
Herz it's boosting all the way up into
like basically 6K Herz which that's
barely anything but as we start
increasing this number we could
basically make it so it's only impacting
448 HZ so in a practical sense these
three controls are the most important
controls to be aware of yes you can go
much much deeper but right now these are
the three that we are going to focus on
the pitch of these frequencies go from
the lowest all the way down here so this
is going to be super super super Bassy
frequencies you know 80 htz is going to
be like where your kick and your base is
sitting all the way up to 20K which is
going to be extremely sient that's going
to be more of the S on symbols and
things like that now every sound we can
use is ultimately made up of more than
one frequency so even if you're singing
in a which is 440 Herz there are going
to be more frequencies present in that
sound than just 440 because of the room
you may be in the harmonic series and
essentially a bunch of other
mathematical reasons that we're not
going to get into so you can see in this
analyzer here I'm actually going to have
you see me singing an a which is 440 HZ
with this EQ here and I'm going to turn
the analyzer on here so that you can
actually see what's
happening so you can actually see right
here a little snapshot of everything you
can see that there is more than 440 you
can see the 44 40 is actually basically
right there that's the primary note
that's happening and you can see here
there's actually something happening
basically 200 htz underneath of it and
then there's another couple hundred
Hertz above and all the way up so on and
so forth that's the room that's the
harmonic series and other things that
are actually impacting that sound so
it's not just that one frequency that's
present even though that's the only note
that I actually sang so just because you
sing a note at 440 for example there are
going to be other frequencies present in
that sound that you need to be aware of
now this matters because if you're
working with a recorded vocal For
example then that vocal may actually
have frequencies that are causing
problems within the context of a
production and EQ can be used to fix it
by cutting out the offending frequencies
so in this vocal For example uh a lot of
times vocal recordings are going to have
this midrange woy sound that is not
desirable so you can actually use EQ to
remove that and correct it so looking at
this vocal again if we listen to
this I want to show you what I'm talking
about if I were to boost right around
200 htz you're going to notice this
listen watch to
this now if you're wearing headphones
you should really be able to hear that
and if not you should put some
headphones on or use monitors so you can
hear that is really not a great sound
it's really woy yet this sound is often
present in vocals especially for home
studio producers who don't have a well-
treated environment and it also depends
a lot on the microphone that you're
actually using but we can cut off these
offending frequencies by removing say 3
to 5 DB now this this cut right here is
actually a pretty wide cut I'd probably
want to be a little bit more surgical
with it so let's go ahead and remove
that so that right there got rid of it
now just because I'm saying this is what
you may need to do does not mean that
you always need to do this in this
particular case depending on the actual
track and the context of that vocal I
might not actually need to do that this
is where applying these Concepts is
going to come down to using your own
ears another example is a piano pianos
are incredibly resonant instruments and
they're going to contain a lot of
different frequencies so when you're
thinking about how to approach a piano
if there's something sounding off on
that sound or it's sounding bad then you
should focus entirely on identifying
where that sound is in the frequency
spectrum and you can do that by boosting
a narrow band Bell to the point to where
you can clearly hear it and then sweep
through the frequencies like
[Music]
this you can obviously hear how that is
sweeping through now this is not
something that you should rely on Long
term but you can use this as a way to
train your ears so if you're thinking
huh there's something kind of midrangey
that doesn't sound great you can use
this to boost and find and identify
where that problem is and then do the
opposite actually go back and cut so say
around 250 HZ there is a problem you can
just cut that so as you sweep you're
probably going to feel like it all
sounds bad because ultimately it's all
going to sound bad because if you boost
any frequency enough it's it's going to
sound bad so use this only to identify
where you actually need to cut and don't
just start adding Cuts every everywhere
because all these frequencies sound bad
when they're boosted on the flip there
may be frequencies that you want to add
into a sound for color to add brightness
on this piano for example or add low end
on something like Bas or kick so this
piano right here I could go ahead and
add some brightness with something like
a high shelf right here and maybe boost
it around 6K 8K or somewhere in that
ballpark and we can see how this will
sound so let's just go ahead and shut
this off and listen to the piano
completely bypass on the EQ
okay and let's go ahead and add this I'm
going to be a little bit dramatic more
so than I'd probably be in real life but
just so you can hear
[Music]
it so as you can hear as I really start
cranking up it starts sounding a little
weird so here's off and then I'll turn
it on
[Music]
so this is a little bit subtle right
it's not like this whoa that's such a
big difference but it does sound
brighter now one big thing to note is
that when you boost EQ it's going to
increase the overall volume of that
sound so keep an eye on your fader to
make sure that you don't get out of
control with clipping now most eqs are
going to have multiple bands and a band
is simply the number of times you can
adjust the EQ so in the channel EQ that
I have here I have four different bell
curves I have two different shelves and
then I have two different filters not
all eqs are going to have the same same
amount some will only even have a single
band just because you have several bands
does not mean you have to use them all
at once a huge mistake I see producers
and mixers make is making EQ moves that
are totally unnecessary which usually
ends up making it worse if your EQ looks
like this right here I would argue that
nine out of 10 times you are doing more
harm than good so just be careful about
that now if you're feeling stuck making
less than Pro sounding Productions then
you should really check out my
production course producer accelerator
which has helped over 500 producers
level up their own Productions and this
week we just released our new 3-day
sneak peek which gives you a chance to
have 3 days of lessons sent right to you
from the full course to get a feel for
it it's totally free you'll get a ton of
value from it if you want to increase
your own production quality you can
click the link right over here to get it
and we'll see you in the next video